He's the world leader accused of personally approving murder on the
streets of London. The conclusion that the Russian state was probably
involved in the murder of Mr Litvinenko is deeply disturbing.
But is the president implicated in an assassination also responsible
for theft on an extraordinary scale? He has fleets of things that almost
no billionaire in the West would have. Vladimir Putin has been
accused of looting his own country. TRANSLATION: Today Putin behaves
like a Tsarnaev. -- Tsar. Tonight we investigate the
truth about President Putin's riches. Why would it be kept secret?
Because it belongs personally to Putin, not to the state. For the
first time the Americans say what they really think about the Russian
president. Is Vladimir Putin corrupt? In our view, yes.
There is no other world leader like Vladimir Putin. Action man. Man of
the people. And ruler of Russia. From Ukraine to
Syria, Vladimir Putin's influence is being felt. He's faced countless
accusations of corruption, but he still has record approval ratings in
Russia. What do you think of Vladimir Putin? But should the
Russian people trust Vladimir Putin? President Putin's official income is
around $100,000 a year, yet he lives like the super rich. He has a
collection of expensive watches, even his designer tracksuit cost
$3,000. He has a level of living that is far in excess of anything
anyone in the West would have, even the very richest. It's that kind of
level that we see from Saudi Princes. So how rich is Vladimir
Putin? Well, it may be one of Russia's best-kept secrets, but one
journalist came up with a figure. Stanislav Belkovsky claimed Putin
had secret share holdings in some of Russia's biggest companies. I met
him in Moscow. I've got this information from my confidential
sources. What figure did you come up with for Vladimir Putin's wealth?
$40 billion in assets, not in cash of course. I'm sure Putin is the
richest man in Europe, one of the richest men in the world. Putin
himself dismissed the $40 billion claim.
But a secret CIA report agreed with Belkovsky's figure. In their view,
Putin was worth around $40 billion. Did you tell the CIA the details of
your 40 billion figure? No, no. I think CIA and FBI have this
information separately without my assistance.
Russia's role in the Ukrainian conflict has led to closer scrutiny
of Putin's finances. Many of his inner circle have faced financial
sanctions from the Americans and the European Union. Now the US won't
publicly confirm the 40-billion figure, but they have told Panorama
what they think about Putin's wealth. I'm not in a position to
give you figures, but what I can say is that he supposedly draws a state
salary of something like $110,000 a year. That is not an accurate
statement of the man's wealth. And he has long time training and
practices in terms of how to mask his actual wealth. Is Vladimir Putin
corrupt? In our view, yes. How long has the United States known that
Vladimir Putin was, in your words, a corrupt figure? I think for many,
many years. Russia dismisses this sort of talk as nonsense. But the
fact that the Americans are finally labelling Putin as corrupt shows how
bad relations have become. So what's the truth about Putin's money? Has
Russia's president been making billions on the side and if he has,
where's it all hidden? I've come to Estonia to meet a man who says he
knows about some of Putin's cash. He fled Russia after falling out with
Kremlin insiders. Our contact helped Putin collect money from the super
rich. They all thought it was to pay for health care. But Sergey
Kolesnikov says some of the donated cash was diverted and ultimately
used to help build a billion-dollar palace for Putin.
TRANSLATION: Regrettably these fund, which were supposed to be invested
in decent investment projects, to a significant extent ended up being
spent on a palace on the plaque sea coast. -- Black Sea coast. And here
it is. President Putin says the palace is
nothing to do with him. But we've seen documents linking Vladimir
Putin to the palace at the time it was built. They show a secret money
trail, and it's claimed Putin was at the heart of it. These are documents
from one of the offshore companies that diverted millions of dollars to
the palace. According to Kolesnikov, the owner of this company was Putin
himself. The offshore company was overseen by Kolesnikov and his
business partner, a Kremlin insider called Nikolai Shamalov.
TRANSLATION: Shamalov said that he was taking 96 shares, 96%, keeping
2% for himself and he would be giving 94% to Putin.
There's more evidence. Kolesnikov and Shamalov were recorded
apparently discussing $440 million of investments belonging to Putin.
They refer to Putin using a nickname: Mikhail Ivanovich.
Shamalov is still a trusted Kremlin insider. In that recording, he was
discussing Putin's Secret Fortune. Finding evidence like that about
Putin is not easy. He used to run Russia's intelligence service. He
knows how to hide secrets. Few from his inner circle ever talk, but
Panorama has tracked down one who will. I've come to Nice in the south
of France to meet him. So I'm at the hotel and we're about to be picked
up and taken to the interview location. The truth is we have no
idea where we're going. We certainly don't have anything like an address.
The reason is probably because the man that we're on our way to
interview is on the run. He was one of Russia's richest and
most important men. But he fled his homeland and says he can't go back.
His driver has brought me to a secret location. Hi. How are you? P
Sergei Pugachev -- this is Sergei Pugachev. He says he helped Putin
become president. They were friends. Their children played together.
TRANSLATION: I had a very close relationship with Putin. Putin
consulted me. Putin confided in me. Pugachev took Putin to see one of
the presidential palaces. TRANSLATION: Of course, this was an
absolutely new world, new life. Of course, he was astonished by it. In
that first term as president, what was Putin's attitude to money?
TRANSLATION: I think that Putin was preoccupied with the issue of wealth
from the start. For Putin this was an important factor. We talked about
it. He didn't hide it. He knew he wanted to leave office as a wealthy
person. Vladimir Putin has come a long way. He wasn't born rich and to
understand him, you need to go to his home city, St Petersburg. This
is where he grew up, there on the fifth floor. Putin's family had one
room in a shared apartment. No hot water and a shared kitchen in the
corridor. Vladimir Putin grew up in poverty. But it was in St Petersburg
that Vladimir Putin first tasted power. Back in the '90s, not long
out of the KGB, Putin became a deputy mayor. On his watch, millions
of dollars disappeared from public funds to a company called Twentieth
Trust. The detective who investigated says Putin was one of
those who benefitted. He says Putin ended up with a property in
Torrevieja in Spain. TRANSLATION: If Twentieth Trust is
building a Villa for Putin in Torrevieja, is this Putin personally
receiving the money or not? In my opinion, the answer is
straightforward. But the criminal case was closed
after Putin became president. Zykov says he was forced into retirement.
The Kremlin has denied the claims. But Spanish investigators revealed
the details of wiretapped phone conversations between Russians
who've been linked to organised crime. They can be heard discussing
Putin's property in Spain. One of the gangsters says Putin's house is
in Torrevieja, the same Spanish town Zykov had identified. It looks like
Zykov was right. Putin got a house in Spain. So in St Petersburg, Putin
learned how to profit from power. He also built a loyal team. After he
moved to the Kremlin, they came with him. The men closest to Putin have
been with him for years. They were with him here in St Petersburg and
they've stayed with him ever since. This is the group that he trusts and
that he rewards, and this is the group that runs Russia. Putin's
lawyer at the Town Hall became president and then Prime Minister of
Russia. His former deputy also served as prime minister. The Chief
of Staff at the Town Hall now runs Russia's anti-drugs agency. His
former assistant now runs the biggest oil company in the world.
And his form ere economist -- former economist now runs the biggest gas
company in the world. All of them worked with Putin in this building.
They rose up together. They went with him to Moscow. They have been a
very stable elite. This whole group, who grabbed the commanding heights
of the Russian economy, they all work together in a very small
office, in fact, in St Petersburg. As President, Putin was at the
centre of this new elite. He had power and access to the super-rich.
You can see how Putin used it by looking at his relations with
Britain's most famous Russian, Chelsea owner Roman Abramovich. He
was one of the unwitting donors to Putin's Palace. He thought all his
cash would be spent on health care, and he gave more than $200 million.
TRANSLATION: Abramovich's role was rather simple. He provided $203
million. Were these oligarchs effectively just paying tribute to
Vladimir Putin? I think this is exactly what they thought.
Abramovich and other wealthy Russians are expected to pay for
important projects, like hosting the 2018 World Cup.
The Fifa World Cup, ladies and gentleman, will be organised in
Russia. But we have been told about a gift that can't be explained away
as good for anyone other than Vladimir Putin. A 35mm or is yacht
like this one. -- 35 Ian dollars yacht. Given by Roman Abramovich.
And our source is the man who managed the yacht.
He fell out with the Kremlin, he is a wanted man in Russia and he is
living in the UK. Dmitry, I am Richard. Nice to meet
you. Dmitry Skarga says he oversaw the transfer of the yacht from
Abramovich to Putin. In March 2002 in Amsterdam, there was a
representative of Mr Abramovich. Skarga says the yacht was given to
an offshore company but the real owner was President Putin.
We have seen documents that would appear to support Skarga's story.
Roman Abramovich's lawyers said the claims were unsubstantiated, little
more than a rehash of speculation and rumours. But they didn't
specifically deny that he had given President Putin a yacht.
You can hardly blame Abramovich for wanting to keep on Putin's good
side. Standing up to him can be dangerous.
This is a billionaire Mikhail Khordorkovsky publicly challenging
Putin about corruption. Khordorkovsky was jailed for tax
evasion and embezzlement. His business was taken by the Russian
state. The beauty of the system is that it's organise and run according
to the old adage, for my friends everything, for my enemies the law.
The message that Putin chose to send to all of them was, I can put you in
prison for anything. I don't need to have a watertight case. That is the
genius of the system. Sergei Pugachev claims he lost his business
too. He started a multi-billion dollar compensation claim against
the Russian state. But the Russian authorities accuse him of stealing
billions of dollars from a bank used to own.
TRANSLATION: There is no court in Russia, that is why I went to the
International court. I am convinced I will win. The Russian state says
you effectively looted your bank after it was bailed out by the
Russian Central Bank. Lead you do that? Well, of course not. -- did
you do that? These are absurd accusation is not substantiated by
anything. We don't know who is telling the truth about Pugachev's
fortune, but the allegation is clear, Putin controls the super-rich
in Russia. People who possess a fortune, a large business in Russia,
realise that they do not own this, because everything depends on Putin.
They depend on hundred percent on his mood. -- 100%. For those who
have been in Putin Circle, the benefits have been immense. A
cellist who is godfather to Putin's daughter has a valuable stake in a
major Russian bank. A neighbour has an even bigger stake. Another
neighbour ended up running the railways. A childhood friend has
made a fortune from government contracts. And his brother has made
even more. The Americans say this is how Putin's Russia works. We have
seen him enriching his friends, his close allies. And marginalising
those who he doesn't view as friends. Using state assets. Whether
that is Russia's energy wealth, whether it is other state contracts,
he directs those to whom he believes will serve him and excludes those
who don't. And if you want to make money in
Russia, this is the industry, the nation's greatest riches are in oil
and gas. Russia exports well over 1 billion barrels of oil per year. And
here too Vladimir Putin has been accused of taking a cut for himself.
Putin came and established a system where high rank officials want to
control vital strategic assets. What we have now is a bunch of shady guys
who barely appear in public, who control vital businesses linked to
the state, which makes one wonder whether they are real beneficiaries
or somebody superpowerful is behind their back.
I have come to New York to meet a man who says Putin took a slice of
his oil business. He is yet another Russian who has fled abroad. He says
his life has been threatened. This is his first TV interview.
Max, I am Richard. Max Friedzon started his business in Saint
Petersburg when Putin was the deputy mayor. He gave him a monopoly to
supply oil to the local airport, but he says the help came at a price.
TRANSLATION: I know from my business partner that Putin asked for a share
in the business. Initially, they were asking for 15%. He called them
greedy bastards. He managed to put them down to 4%. Obviously this
wasn't registered in any official papers. The Kremlin says Max's story
is untrue. But the Americans have highlighted another energy company
that they say Putin has links to. It is called Gunvor. According to the
Americans, Putin had secret investments in the company. What
exactly do you mean by investment is? We believe it's a place where he
is storing money. How much? I can't give you an estimate. Gunvor said
these frames were illogical and preposterous conspiracy theories,
and that President Putin does not and never has had any ownership in
Gunvor. The Americans insist they are right. They haven't provided any
evidence. It's important because Gunvor has
traded much of Russia's state oil. It has made big profits, and nearly
half of the company was owned by this man, Gennady Timchenko, one of
Putin's friends. He has now sold his stake. It is said he is worth $10
billion. And he is on the US sanctions list. The Americans claim
his activities in the energy sector have been directed by President
Putin. Has Gennady Timchenko been holding well for Vladimir Putin, do
you think? I don't know if I would put it that way in terms of holding
his wealth, I would say he has been tremendous Lien Richard personally
by Vladimir Putin, as have another handful of people in his inner
circle. There are allegations that he holds tremendous amounts of
Putin's well. Gennady Timchenko's lawyers say the US has never
produced any evidence and that the claims are propaganda in which their
client is a collateral target. Mr Timchenko categorically denies that
President Putin has controlled his assets or enriched him, but to our
sources say Mr Timchenko was very much under the control of Vladimir
Putin. -- two of our sources. TRANSLATION: From the very start,
Putin understood that money which Timchenko was managing, or one way
or another without any doubt, belonged to Putin. It was never a
secret. Mr Timchenko's lawyers say that our two main sources are not
credible and may have axes to grind. President Putin denies all the
allegations in this programme. His spokesman declined to answer our
absurd questions because the issues we had raised were pure fiction.
This all matters because President Putin is one of the most powerful
people on the planet. But he has been accused of using that power to
enrich himself on a vast scale. TRANSLATION: I started arguing with
Shamalov and he said to me, who do you think you are? You are a series
prefixerf. The tsar made a decision, your job is that of a surf to
deliver. -- a serf. People say that Putin can demand anything he wants,
so that any figure on his wealth is meaningless. Everything that can be
converted into cash can be his own. How would you describe that kind of
wealth? Putin has been accused of corruption
on an extraordinary scale. The modern tsar who plundered his own
empire.